---
title: "The role of silicon in regulating physiological and biochemical mechanisms of contrasting bread wheat cultivars under terminal drought and heat stress environments"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/silicon-wheat-heat-drought
excerpt: ""
date: 2022-08-03
venue: 'Frontiers in Plant Science'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2022.955490'
bibtexurl: '/files/Ashfaq2022etal.bib'
citation: "Ashfaq, W., Fuentes, S., Brodie, G., & Gupta, D. (2022). The role of silicon in regulating physiological and biochemical mechanisms of contrasting bread wheat cultivars under terminal drought and heat stress environments. <i>Frontiers in Plant Science</i>, 13, 955490."
---
The individual and cumulative effects of drought stress (DS) and heat stress (HS) are the primary cause of grain yield (GY) reduction in a rainfed agricultural system. Crop failures due to DS and HS are predicted to increase in the coming years due to increasingly severe weather events. Plant available silicon (Si, H4SiO4) has been widely reported for its beneficial effects on plant development, productivity, and attenuating physiological and biochemical impairments caused by various abiotic stresses. The current study investigated the impact of pre-sowing Si treatment on six contrasting wheat cultivars (four drought and heat stress-tolerant and two drought and heat stress-susceptible) under individual and combined effects of drought and heat stress at an early grain-filling stage. DS, HS, and drought-heat combined stress (DHS) significantly (p < 0.05) altered morpho-physiological and biochemical attributes in susceptible and tolerant wheat cultivars. However, results showed that Si treatment significantly improved various stress-affected morpho-physiological and biochemical traits, including GY (>40%) and yield components. Si treatment significantly (p < 0.001) increased the reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenging antioxidant activities at the cellular level, which is linked with higher abiotic stress tolerance in wheat. With Si treatment, osmolytes concentration increased significantly by >50% in tolerant and susceptible wheat cultivars. Similarly, computational water stress indices (canopy temperature, crop water stress index, and canopy temperature depression) also improved with Si treatment under DS, HS, and DHS in susceptible and tolerant wheat cultivars. The study concludes that Si treatment has the potential to mitigate the detrimental effects of individual and combined stress of DS, HS, and DHS at an early grain-filling stage in susceptible and tolerant wheat cultivars in a controlled environment. These findings also provide a foundation for future research to investigate Si-induced tolerance mechanisms in susceptible and tolerant wheat cultivars at the molecular level.
